[hardware-computing]: Add first session content (#3)
security-summer-school/hardware-sec: hardware-computing/README.md

For the x86_64 assembly, please review the **Security Essentials** [Assembly Language](https://github.com/security-summer-school/essentials/tree/master/assembly-language) and [Taming the Stack](https://github.com/security-summer-school/essentials/tree/master/taming-the-stack) sessions.

## Introduction

In terms of computing, the tendencies are to require more information to be processed, as fast as possible and as secure as possible.
And usually, the best way to ensure the maximum computation speed is to move the processing from software to hardware.
That's why most systems have specialised hardware components, that are able to do some of the most common operations: checksum computing for network packets, basic routing, encrypting and decrypting, hashing, random number generation.
Some of these operations are critical in ensuring the security of a system.
In this session we will explore some of those:
 * Encryption and decryption on Intel and ARM CPUs, in particular the AES algorithm
 * Random number generation

After studying these concepts, we have one more topic: can we trust the hardware?

> Many people posed that question, including tech giants.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Many people have posed this question, including tech giants.
```

> Those questions resulted in the creation of the `Trusted Computing` concept.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Those questions resulted in the creation of the **Trusted Computing** concept.
```

Only use backtics for code-related keywords / snippets. If you want to emphasise a concept, use bolded / italic text.

Documentation can be found in the [Further Reading](https://github.com/security-summer-school/hardware-sec/tree/main/hardware-computing#further-reading) section.

## Hardware Random Number Generation

Randomness, also called entropy, is essential in security, being used in generating encryption and decryption keys.
However, ensuring true randomness on a system is a difficult task, which is subject of many research papers.
Usually, random numbers are generated by a **(Pseudo)Random Number Generator - (P)RNG** component on the system, using hardware and software events that can't be easily predicted: cpu frequency at a given time, the number of interrupts, hashes of network packets, movement of the mouse, etc.
Those RNG components are most of the times software.
Considering this, Intel has implemented hardware RNGs on their processors, which are more secure than their software counterparts, being hard to predict.
The values returned by those RNGs can be read using the `RDRAND` and `RDSEED` instructions.

### RDRAND

`RDRAND` is the first implemented instruction on the Intel CPUs.
At the moment of its apparition, it wasn't secure, as it could be intercepted by side-channel attacks.

> An example of attack is the CrossTalk attack, designated as [CVE-2020-0543](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/security-center/advisory/intel-sa-00320.html).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One such attack is _CrossTalk_, designated as [CVE-2020-0543](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/security-center/advisory/intel-sa-00320.html).
```

#### Challenge: RDRAND and RDSEED in C

Again, a simple task. Generate some random numbers in C, using the compiler [intrinsic functions](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/docs/intrinsics-guide/index.html#othertechs=RDRAND,RDSEED).

You can find the task resources [here](https://github.com/security-summer-school/hardware-sec/tree/hardware-computing/hardware-computing/activities/rdrand-and-rdseed-in-c).

#### Challenge: Performance Evaluation

Read some values from `/dev/urandom`, and compare the time it takes to do so with the time it takes to read the same number of values using `rdrand`.

You can find the task resources [here](https://github.com/security-summer-school/hardware-sec/tree/hardware-computing/hardware-computing/activities/performance-evaluation).

### Exploiting RDRAND and RDSEED?

Theoretically, there are exploits, that can leak the values of RDRAND and RDSEED.
But the attack is very hard to replicate, so we won't do it.
If you want to have a go at it, you can read the article describing CrossTalk, in the Resources section.
Contact your trainer for details on how to do it.

### When to Use RDRAND and RDSEED?

> There are software solutions much faster than the hardware RNGs provided by Intel, so why use them?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are software solutions that are much faster than the hardware RNGs provided by Intel, so why use them?
```

The RDRAND and RDSEED instructions perform better when cryptographically secure random numbers are needed.

## Trusted Computing

> The concept of `Trusted Computing` was introduced by Trusted Computing Group, and it aims to give the hardware control over waht software can be run on it, by being able to refuse to run unsigned software.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The concept of **Trusted Computing** was introduced by Trusted Computing Group, and it aims to give the hardware control over waht software can be run on it, by being able to refuse to run unsigned software.
```

This enforcement means that the system will most of the times behave as expected.

> For a system to fall under the `Trusted Computing` standard, it needs to have some components:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For a system to fall under the Trusted Computing standard, it needs to have some components:
```

  * an endorsment key - a public / private key, created at manufacture time, used to prove the identity of the system; the private key must never leave the chip where it is stored
  * memory curtailing - the system must provide full isolation of some sensitive areas of memory, blocking even the Operating System from accessing them
  * sealed storage - the system must provide a storage space, where private data can be stored and extracted only at a certain software-hardware configuration state
  * remote attestation - the system must allow authorised parties to detect changes in the system.
  For example, any changes done to a software by the user and not approved by the vendor, can be detected, using a certificate generated by the hardware
  * trusted third party - to maintain annonimity, a system will not communicate to another system that it's running verified hardware and software directly, as this may allow the receiver of this information to identify the sender.
  Instead, a third party will verify that the first system is non-altered, and will relate that to the second system

> All of those concepts are included on most of today's systems, using a hardware chip, called a `Trusted Platform Module` 	  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All of those concepts are included on most of today's systems, using a hardware chip, called a **Trusted Platform Module**.
```

### Trusted Platform Module - TPM

The TPM is ussually a chip, residing on the motherboard.

> It must implement the `Trusted Computing` standard, meaning that it must implement the 6 components from above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It must implement the Trusted Computing standard, meaning that it must implement the 6 components from above.
```

The current version of the TPM is 2.0, and is mandatory in order to run some software, like Windows 10.
The user can interact with the TPM using special libraries.
For today's session, we will use bash commands, and the [tpm2-tools](https://github.com/tpm2-software/tpm2-tools) suite.
Particularly usefull is the [man folder](https://github.com/tpm2-software/tpm2-tools/tree/master/man).
You can use a [Docker image](https://github.com/security-summer-school/hardware-sec/tree/main/hardware-computing/resources/tpm-docker), with the tools already installed.

#### Exploiting the TPM

If exploiting the RDRAND and RDSEED instructions seems hard and unreliable, TPM is almost impossible to be exploited without direct access to the chip.

> You can find the CVEs in the [Further Reading](https://github.com/security-summer-school/hardware-sec/tree/main/hardware-computing#further-reading) section.

Reviewer: I'm pretty sure this works fine if you only use the fragment and not the whole URL.

[Intel AES-NI Intrinsic Functions](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/docs/intrinsics-guide/index.html#othertechs=AES)

[TPM 2.0 Specification](https://trustedcomputinggroup.org/resource/tpm-library-specification/)

## Further Reading

[Windows ARM AES Intrinsics](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.runtime.intrinsics.arm.aes?view=net-6.0)

[Linux ARM AES Intrinsics](https://developer.arm.com/architectures/instruction-sets/intrinsics/#f:@navigationhierarchiesinstructiongroup=[Cryptography,AES])

[Intel DRNG Implementation](https://www.intel.com/content/dam/develop/external/us/en/documents/441-intel-r-drng-software-implementation-guide-final-aug7.pdf)

[CrossTalk Paper](https://download.vusec.net/papers/crosstalk_sp21.pdf)

[TPM Local Security Vulnerability - CVE-2018-6622](https://www.cvedetails.com/cve/CVE-2018-6622/)

[TPM-FAIL - TPM Timing Attack - CVE-2019-11090 and CVE-2019-16863](https://tpm.fail/tpmfail.pdf)

[TPM Device Driver Information Disclosure Vunerability - CVE 2021-1656](https://msrc.microsoft.com/update-guide/vulnerability/CVE-2021-1656)

> [Infineon TPM Vulnerability - CVE-2017-15361](https://www.dell.com/support/kbdoc/ro-ro/000144419/infineon-trusted-platform-module-tpm-vulnerability-cve-2017-15361-impact-status-on-dell-products)

Reviewer: Make a list out of these links.

# Secure Hardware Computing

> 

Reviewer: Add a list of "Prerequisites", as described in the [template-public](https://github.com/security-summer-school/template-public/tree/master/session-name-1#reminders-and-prerequisites) repo. Use it to specify that students should already be familiar with the concepts and encryption algorithms (AES, TCB, TPM).

The AES-NI instructions can be also used in C, not only in Assembly, with the so-called **intrinsics**.

The tasks for this part will be straight-forward:

#### 1. Challenge: AES in C

You are provided with an implementation of AES encryption, in C.
Complete the code with the decryption implementation, obtain the flag and submit it.

#### 2. Challenge: AES in ASM

You are provided with an implementation of AES encryption, in Assembly.
Complete the code with the decryption implementation, obtain the flag and submit it.

### ARM Cryptography Extensions

While Intel and AMD provide the AES-NI instruction set with all their newer processors, ARM provides such instructions as an optional extension module, called the "Cryptography Extension".
This module is avaible with the ARMv8 base ISA.
It doesn't support all operations associated with AES encryption and decryption, but provides some instructions for the SHA hashing algorithm.
For AES, the following instructions are provided:
 * AESE, which performs a single encryption round
 * AESD, which performs a single decryption round
 * AESMC, which performs the `mix collumns` operation

>  * AESIMC, which performs the `inverse mix collumns` operation

Reviewer: Use backticks for the `AES*` instructions.

>  * AESMC, which performs the `mix collumns` operation
>  * AESIMC, which performs the `inverse mix collumns` operation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 * AESMC, which performs the `MixColumns` operation
 * AESIMC, which performs the `InverseMixColumns` operation
```

So that they're consistent with Rijndael's notations.

# Secure Hardware Computing

In terms of computing, the tendencies are to require more information to be processed, as fast as possible and as secure as possible.

> And ussualy, the best way to ensure the maximum computation speed is to move the processing from software to hardware.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And usually, the best way to ensure the maximum computation speed is to move processing from software to hardware.
```

That's why most systems have specialised hardware components, that are able to do some of the most common operations: checksum computing for network packets, basic routing, encrypting and decrypting, hashing, random number generation.
Some of these operations are critical in ensuring the security of a system.
In this session we will explore some of those:
 * Encryption and decryption on Intel and ARM CPUs, in particular the AES algorithm
 * Random number generation

> After that is done we have one more topic: can we trust the hardware?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After studying these concepts, we have one more topic: can we trust the hardware?
```

Many people posed that question, including tech giants.
Those questions resulted in the creation of the `Trusted Computing` concept.
We'll see what it is and how it is implemented. 

## AES Instruction Sets

One of the most common algorithms used for encryption and decryption is AES (Advanced Encryption Standard).

> As it's name suggests, it is the standard for securing data that cannot (should not) be intercepted over a network.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As its name suggests, AES is the standard for securing data that cannot (should not) be intercepted over a network.
```

It is used to encrypt certain files, whole disks, by password managers to store passwords, and other uses.
Being used so much, it was only natural that the most efficient implementation was searched.

> And, generally, the most efficient implementation of an algorithm is directly on hardware.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And, generally, the most efficient implementation of an algorithm is directly in the hardware.
```

> Implementation on hardware has one more benefit: it is more secure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A hardware implementation has one more benefit: it is more secure.
```

If done by software, while being secure against brute-force attacks, AES can be broken using side-channel attacks.
The hardware implementation is much harder to be affected by such attacks.

Intel, AMD, ARM, Risc-V SPARC, IBM have implemented AES instruction sets in hardware.
We will discuss the implentations from Intel and ARM.

> If interested in the implementations from other architectures, you can find them in the `Further Reading` section.

Reviewer: Add a hyperlink to the `Further Reading` section.

If you are not familiar with how AES works, you can find details about it in the `helpers/` folder, in the `aes.md` file.

### Intel AES-NI

In 2008, Intel proposed an AES instruction set for the x86_64 CPUs, AES-NI (Advanced Encryption Standard New Instructions).
AMD also implemented the instruction set for their CPUs.

The instruction set provides 2 instructions for encrypting, 2 for decrypting, and 2 for key generation:
 * AESENC performs an encryption round
 * AESENCLAST performs the last encryption round
 * AESDEC performs a decryption round
 * AESDECLAST performs the last decryption round
 * AESKEYGENASSIS aids in the key expansion phase of the algorithm

>  * AEIMC prepares a key for being used in decryption

Reviewer: Use backticks for the instructions (eg.: `AESENC`).

All the instructions use XMM registers, which are part of the SSE / AVX instruction sets.
If you are unsure what those are, you can find information about them in the `helpers/` folder, in the `simd-instructions.md` file.

In the case of the first 4 and the 6th instructions, 2 XMM registers are used: the first one stores the intermediary state of the cyphertext, and the second one the key used in that round.

> The 5th one also takes an immediate value, called RCON, which is used in the key generation algorithm.

Reviewer: Is this necessary? The students will preferably get this information in the section `AES in ASM`.

Author: I'm not sure. I'll see when I make the challenges.

For those of you that don't like the Assembly language, there are good news.
The AES-NI instructions can be also used in C, not only in Assembly, with the so-called **intrinsics**.

The tasks for this part will be straight-forward:

#### 1. AES in C

> You are provided with an implementation of AES encryption, in C. Complete the code with the decryption implementation, obtain the flag and submit it.

Reviewer: For the future: add a hyperlink that points to the task folder.

#### 2. AES in ASM

> You are provided with an implementation of AES encryption, in Assembly. Complete the code with the decryption implementation, obtain the flag and submit it.

Reviewer: Same as above.
